The complexity of explaining highly scientific information and juggling a plethora of social values is leading agencies and communities such as those in the Palouse Basin to explore the use of participatory modeling processes using system dynamics. Participatory system dynamics as a methodology creates a transparent nexus of science, policy options, social concerns and local knowledge that enhances discussion of issues surrounding the use of natural resources. The process of developing a systems model uses the tenets of scientific theory, hypothesis testing and clear statements of assumptions. A unique aspect of the Palouse basin project is the use of system dynamics to describe ground water dynamics in a sole source confined aquifer system. There are, as of yet, no standards for analyzing participatory modeling projects, therefore, we use case study analysis to describe the process, insights and qualitative measurements of success.

A decision support tool was created to estimate the treatment efficiency of an Australian drinking water treatment system based on different combinations of extreme weather events and long-term changes. To deal with uncertainties, missing data, and nonlinear behaviours, a Bayesian network (BN) was coupled with a system dynamics (SD) model. The preliminary conceptual structures of these models were developed through stakeholders’ consultation. The BN model could rank extreme events, and combinations of them, based on the severity of their impact on health-related water quality. The SD model, in turn, was used to run a long-term estimation of extreme events’ impacts by including temporal factors such as increased water demand and customer feedback. The integration of the two models was performed through a combined Monte Carlo–fuzzy logic approach which allowed to take the BN’s outputs as inputs for the SD model. The final product is a participatory, multidisciplinary decision support system allowing for robust, sustainable long-term water resources management under uncertain conditions for a specific location.

A participatory modelling process has been conducted in two areas of the Guadiana river (the upper and the middle sub-basins), in Spain, with the aim of providing support for decision making in the water management field. The area has a semi-arid climate where irrigated agriculture plays a key role in the economic development of the region and accounts for around 90% of water use. Following the guidelines of the European Water Framework Directive, we promote stakeholder involvement in water management with the aim to achieve an improved understanding of the water system and to encourage the exchange of knowledge and views between stakeholders in order to help building a shared vision of the system. At the same time, the resulting models, which integrate the different sectors and views, provide some insight of the impacts that different management options and possible future scenarios could have. The methodology is based on a Bayesian network combined with an economic model and, in the middle Guadiana sub-basin, with a crop model. The resulting integrated modelling framework is used to simulate possible water policy, market and climate scenarios to find out the impacts of those scenarios on farm income and on the environment. At the end of the modelling process, an evaluation questionnaire was filled by participants in both sub-basins. Results show that this type of processes are found very helpful by stakeholders to improve the system understanding, to understand each other’s views and to reduce conflict when it exists. In addition, they found the model an extremely useful tool to support management. The graphical interface, the quantitative output and the explicit representation of uncertainty helped stakeholders to better understand the implications of the scenario tested. Finally, the combination of different types of models was also found very useful, as it allowed exploring in detail specific aspects of the water management problems.

Several modeling tools commonly used for supporting flood risk assessment and management are highly effective in representing physical phenomena, but provide a rather limited understanding of the multiple implications that flood risk and flood risk reduction measures have on highly complex systems such as urban areas. In fact, most of the available modeling tools do not fully account for this complexity—and related uncertainty—which heavily affects the interconnections between urban systems evolution and flood risk, ultimately resulting in an ineffective flood risk management. The present research proposes an innovative methodological framework to support decision-makers involved in an urban regeneration process at a planning/strategic level, accounting for the multi-dimensional implications of flood risk and of different flood risk management strategies. The adopted approach is based on the use of System Thinking principles and participatory System Dynamics modeling techniques, and pursues an integration between scientific and stakeholder knowledge. Reference is made to one of the case studies of the CUSSH and CAMELLIA projects, namely Thamesmead (London), a formerly inhospitable marshland currently undergoing a process of urban regeneration, and perceived as being increasingly vulnerable to flooding. It represents an interesting opportunity for building a replicable modeling approach to integrate urban development dynamics with flood risk, ultimately supporting policy and decision-makers in identifying mitigation/prevention measures and understanding how they could help achieve multi-dimensional benefits (e.g., environmental, social and economic).

Groundwater availability in upland villages in southern India has reduced drastically during the last two decades. Most farmers believe this is entirely due to the decrease in rainfall. The current work presents participatory system dynamics modeling of crop-water-income dynamics and root cause analysis in one such village to quantify the long-term efects of groundwater withdrawal and other agricultural practices. Groundwater overexploitation was identifed as the most signifcant cause of the crisis. Causal loop diagrams, stocks and fows diagrams, and scenario analysis were developed through focused group discussions and individual meetings with stakeholders. Multiple ’what-if’ scenarios suggested by stakeholders were simulated and analyzed. Notably, less water-intensive, chemical-free farming emerged as an ecologically and economically sustainable strategy. A post-project survey indicated that 90% of stakeholders felt that the framework enhanced their understanding of the problem, encouraged unbiased exploration of new ideas, and raised their commitment to subsequent action plans. It is an easily replicable framework for adoption by farmers and policymakers to address the groundwater crisis and promote sustainable farming practices.

Planning and decision-making vastly benefit from a holistic and systematic understanding of the long-term impacts of climate change and other non-climatic stressors on the health and resilience of coral reef ecosystems, and the efficacy of adaptation strategies and management interventions on mitigating these impacts and maintaining ecosystem condition and associated ecosystem service. This study reports on an approach to modelling coral reef stressors and possible adaptation interventions using the coral reef ecosystem of Port Resolution on Tanna Island, Vanuatu as the case study serving as a microcosm of endangered Pacific Small Island Developing States (SIDS). A novel participatory modelling framework was developed and followed in a stepwise manner to integrate local and long-term climate change pressures by coupling structural analysis and the Bayesian Network (BN) techniques. The BN model was quantified through an advanced consolidated data-induced, evidence-based, and expert-driven approach that incorporated: (1) projections of future climate conditions and changing human activities; (2) the influences of multiple stressors including physical environmental and sociological factors; and (3) spatial variability in the key processes and variables. The first and second phases conceptualised the whole system by providing a graphical presentation of system variables within the Driver-Pressure-State-Impact (DPSI) framework using the structural analysis technique. In the third phase, the BN technique was used to integrate the outcomes of multidisciplinary assessments and analysis with experts’ opinion. The BN modelling phase was completed based on evidence extracted from literature which reported the results of regional and downscaled climate models, GIS-based analysis, parametrised data obtained from the region, and tacit knowledge elicited from experts. The validated model was employed to anticipate the future health and resilience condition of coral reefs under different sets of climatic trajectories and adaptive responses scenarios. The results predict the risks to the health and resilience of the Port Resolution coral reef system from the adverse impacts of climate change and harmful human activities and the possible success of adaptations strategies. A sobering conclusion was that despite the current satisfactory condition of coral reefs in the case study zone, their health and resilience would be severely threatened by 2070 in the absence of implementing adaptation strategies and associated sustainable management interventions.

Over the course of the last twenty years, participatory modeling has increasingly been advocated as an integral component of integrated, adaptive, and collaborative water resources management. However, issues of high cost, time, and expertise are significant hurdles to the widespread adoption of participatory modeling in many developing countries. In this study, a step-wise method to initialize the involvement of key stakeholders in the development of qualitative system dynamics models (i.e. causal loop diagrams) is presented. The proposed approach is designed to overcome the challenges of low expertise, time and financial resources that have hampered previous participatory modeling efforts in developing countries. The methodological framework was applied in a case study of soil salinity management in the Rechna Doab region of Pakistan, with a focus on the application of qualitative modeling through stakeholder-built causal loop diagrams to address soil salinity problems in the basin. Individual causal loop diagrams were developed by key stakeholder groups, following which an overall group causal loop diagram of the entire system was built based on the individual causal loop diagrams to form a holistic qualitative model of the whole system. The case study demonstrates the usefulness of the proposed approach, based on using causal loop diagrams in initiating stakeholder involvement in the participatory model building process. In addition, the results point to social-economic aspects of soil salinity that have not been considered by other modeling studies to date.

Achieving the objectives of sustainable development in water and agri-food systems requires the utilisation of decision-support tools in stakeholder-driven processes to construct and simulate various scenarios and evaluate the outcomes of associated policy interventions. While it is common practice to involve stakeholders in participatory modelling processes, their comprehensive documentation and the lessons learned remain scarce. In this paper, we share our experience of engaging stakeholders throughout the entire system dynamics modelling process. We draw on two projects implemented in the Volta River Basin, West Africa, to understand the dynamics of water and agri-food systems under changing environmental and socioeconomic conditions. We outline eight key insights and lessons as practical guides derived from each stage of the participatory modelling process, including the pre-workshop stage, problem definition, model conceptualization, simulation model formulation, model testing and verification, and policy design and evaluation. Our findings demonstrate that stakeholders can actively contribute to all phases of the system dynamics modelling process, including parameter estimation, sensitivity analysis, and numerical simulation experiments. However, we encountered notable challenges, including the time-intensive nature of the process, the struggle to reach a consensus on the modelled problem, and the difficulty of translating the conceptual model into a simulation model using stock and flow diagrams – all of which were addressed through a structured facilitation process. While the projects were anchored in the specific context of West Africa, the key lessons and insights highlighted have broader significance, particularly for researchers employing PSDM in regions characterised by multifaceted human-environmental systems and where stakeholder involvement is crucial for holistic understanding and effective policy interventions. This paper contributes practical guidance for future efforts with participatory modelling, particularly in regions worldwide grappling with sustainable development challenges in water and agri-food systems, and where stakeholder involvement is crucial for holistic understanding of the multiple challenges and for designing effective policy interventions.

Although our understanding of water resource problems has grown in recent years, our ability to improve decision-making is still limited. Participatory modelling and stakeholder engagement is seen as an important tool that can facilitate strategic decision-making in environmental/natural resource management systems. This paper presents the participatory and methodological processes involved in the development of an integrated qualitative, conceptual model using causal loops diagrams to assist integrated water resources management and sustainable agricultural development in the Volta River Basin, West Africa. The developed integrated conceptual model provides a holistic understanding of the key biophysical and socio-economic factors and processes, and the role the systemic feedbacks play in determining the basin's behaviour. An ex-post analysis of the process with stakeholders showed that the process contributed to the shared understanding of the basin's problems. Based on our experience we present some lessons for the design and application of a participatory modelling process.

Impacts of climate change on natural and human ‘systems’ are often difficult to assess due to high uncertainty and the need to integrate trans-disciplinary knowledge. This includes the worldwide, billion-dollar whale watching industry that depends on some key species such as the humpback whale. The migratory corridors, feeding, resting and calving sites, which are used for whale watching may be influenced by changing ocean currents and water temperatures. Whales are responding through a shift in migration time, behavior, abundance and distribution impacting on whale watching. To address these challenges, the authors developed a participatory model to understand and evaluate the potential effects of climate change (and other determinants) on the whale watching industry using the east coast of Australia as a case study. Using systems thinking and engaging with participants from the whale watching industry, a system structure for whale watching was developed. Elements encompassing climate change (e.g. length of season, temperature), policy (e.g. number of boats), ecology (e.g. number of whales age structure) and socioeconomics (e.g. number of tourists, fuel price) were integrated into this model with the interdependencies and feedback pathways investigated. Using the systems thinking model to help the participants contextualise and visualise their whale watching system, a Bayesian network (BN) model focusing on the determinants of ‘Whale Watching Profitability’ was then developed. The participants defined the structure and conditional probabilities for the BN. A sensitivity analysis on the BN helped identify important intervention points for the industry. This innovative methodology can be applied to other fields and can assist businesses and authorities in making rational management decisions even when data is very limited.

Participatory methods provide an increasingly accepted path to integrated water assessment. This research describes an interdisciplinary exercise of scenario design and modelling, which provides a methodology to couple hard science numerical modelling approaches with the involvement of key water actors and socioeconomic issues. A decision support system based on probabilistic methods (Bayesian networks) is the tool chosen for dealing with the interdisciplinary issues involved in this aquifer. Given the long-standing conflicts in the area, modelling work largely focuses on carrying out an impact assessment produced by different scenarios established under the light of the mandatory objectives established by the European Union Water Framework Directive. This methodology is applied to a semi-arid aquifer located in SE Spain (Serral-Salinas) that represents an extreme case of intensive groundwater use. Irrigation has been a catalyst for welfare in the area for the past 40 years, despite the resulting large groundwater drawdown and continuous rise of groundwater pumping energy costs. Modelling results suggest that only a drastic change in the abstraction regime can produce a solution to long term sustainability of the aquifers. In addition, the impact assessment advises that such objectives are unlikely to be met due to the high economic costs of this action.

The future of the agriculture in mountain areas constitutes an important stake for sustainable development in relation to landscape functions and their role in local economies. This future depends highly on its ability to develop innovative and multifunctional agricultural systems and to preserve its attractiveness for future generations. Encroachment and reforestation of landscapes, which comes from land abandonment and extensification of land use, raise important topical issues. In Pyrenean valleys, where the land is colonised by the ash tree (Fraxinus excelsior), local land managers and policy-makers want to understand better the relationships between the ecological and social processes in order to assist in the design of policies supporting constructive change. Here we present the “companion modelling” approach in which we are all together constructing a simulation model for carrying out a prospective study of land use and landscape changes in the region. According to the principles of this participatory approach, we started developing a spatialised multi-agent model, whose main conceptual aspects are presented here below. The model simulates the evolution of land cover of the agricultural landscape in relation to both the natural and anthropogenic dynamics. Ecological field studies having stressed the role of mowing and grazing practices at the parcel level on colonisation of the local landscape by the ash tree, we focus on the account of prospective change in farmers’ land management practices (viewed as a set of decision rules) and their impact. This ongoing study underlines the interest of spatially explicit modelling of the inter-relationships between social and ecological dynamics at the agricultural landscape scale based on an interdisciplinary approach for dealing with rural development topical issues. Both the advantages gained and the difficulties raised are discussed.

The complex relationship that exists between water resources and agricultural production has been increasing constantly globally. Several factors are interacting to influence the management of water resources making the system complex and dynamic. To increase the understanding of these complex and dynamic systems, relevant tools are needed to identify the causal relationships that exist between the drivers and their influences on the system. Participatory modelling based on the system dynamics approach provides a simplistic and visualisation tool that can improve the understanding of the functioning of a complex and dynamic system. A multi-stage participatory approach was used in this study involving relevant stakeholders in the development of an integrated conceptual system dynamic model using causal loop diagrams. This approach was used because it captures the thought process and mental model of relevant stakeholders in the development of the model, making it a valuable tool for policy and decision making at government and individual levels. The integrated model built in this study used causal loop diagrams to address problems of water management and agricultural sustainability in the Breede River Catchment. The model shows major causal-relationships and feedback loops that determine the functioning of the overall system. The model demonstrates the usefulness of the participatory approach in solving problems related to water management and agricultural development in the catchment.

This research article presents the integration of participatory modeling and system dynamics as a novel methodology for the consolidation of social dynamic models for the subsequent evaluation and prioritization of green projects in Colombian post-conflict communities. First, through participatory work carried out with a community, the citizen factors were identified, evaluated, and systematized in relation to the problems and needs of the region. Second, based on the results obtained, a simulation model based on system dynamics—which facilitates decision-making with regard to the evaluation of green projects—was calibrated. The proposed methodology lead to the conclusion that, with the participation of the community, and with a model based on the dynamics of the variables—such as supply and demand—for natural water and land resources, it is possible to warn decision-makers about variables that can lead to the maximization of investments, and thus to prioritize and select the most appropriate environmental, social, or economic initiatives that meet the needs or expectations of the involved community. In the future, the model could be used to facilitate the management, administration, and control of water and land resources by creating alerts called reserve margins.

Photovoltaic Solar Energy (PSE) sector has sparked great interest from governments over the last decade towards diminution of world’s dependency to fossil fuels, greenhouse gas emissions reduction and global warming mitigation. Photovoltaic solar energy also holds a significant role in the transition to sustainable energy systems. These systems and their optimal exploitation require an effective supply chain management system, such as design of the network, collection, storage, or transportation of this energy resource, without disregarding a country’s certain socio-economic and political conditions. In Brazil, the adoption of photovoltaic solar energy has been motivated not only by the energy matrix diversification but also from the shortages, problems, and barriers that the Brazilian energy sector has faced, lately. However, PSE development is affected by various factors with high uncertainty, such as political, social, economic, and environmental, that include critical operational sustainability issues. Thus, an elaborate modelling of energy management and a well-structured decision support process are needed to enhance the performance efficiency of Brazilian PSE supply chain management. This study focuses on the investigation of certain factors and their influence on the development of the Brazilian PSE with the help of Fuzzy Cognitive Maps. Fuzzy Cognitive Map is an established methodology for scenario analysis and management in diverse domains, inheriting the advancements of fuzzy logic and neural networks. In this context, a semi-quantitative model was designed with the help of various stakeholders from the specific energy domain and three plausible scenarios were conducted in order to support a decision-making process on PSE sector development and the country’s economic potential. The outcome of this analysis reveals that the development of the PSE sector in Brazil is mainly affected by economic and political factors.

Every development and production process needs to operate within a circular economy to keep the human being within a safe limit of the planetary boundary. Policymakers are in the quest of a powerful and easy-to-use tool for representing the perceived causal structure of a complex system that could help them choose and develop the right strategies. In this context, fuzzy cognitive maps (FCMs) can serve as a soft computing method for modelling human knowledge and developing quantitative dynamic models. FCM-based modelling includes the aggregation of knowledge from a variety of sources involving multiple stakeholders, thus offering a more reliable final model. The average aggregation method for weighted interconnections among concepts is widely used in FCM modelling. In this research, we applied the OWA (ordered weighted averaging) learning operators in aggregating FCM weights, assigned by various participants/ stakeholders. Our case study involves a complex phenomenon of poverty eradication and socio-economic development strategies in rural areas under the DAY-NRLM (Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana-National Rural Livelihoods Mission) in India. Various scenarios examining the economic sustainability and livelihood diversification of poor women in rural areas were performed using the FCM-based simulation process implemented by the “FCMWizard” tool. The objective of this study was three-fold: (i) to perform a brief comparative analysis between the proposed aggregation method called “OWA learning aggregation” and the conventional average aggregation method, (ii) to identify the significant concepts and their impact on the examined FCM model regarding poverty alleviation, and (iii) to advance the knowledge of circular economy in the context of poverty alleviation. Overall, the proposed method can support policymakers in eliciting accurate outcomes of proposed policies that deal with social resilience and sustainable socio-economic development strategies.

Participatory modelling is an emerging approach in the decision-making process through which stakeholders contribute to the representation of the perceived causal linkages of a complex system. The use of fuzzy cognitive maps (FCMs) for participatory modelling helps policy-makers develop dynamic quantitative models for strategising development interventions. The aggregation of knowledge from multiple stakeholders provides consolidated and more reliable results. Average aggregation is the most common aggregation method used in FCMs-based modelling for weighted interconnections between concepts. This paper proposes a new aggregation method using learning OWA (ordered weighted averaging) operators for aggregating FCM weights assigned by various stakeholders. Besides, we report a comparative analysis of ‘OWA learning aggregation’ with the conventional average aggregation method, while evaluating the theory of change for the world’s most extensive poverty alleviation programme in India. The results of the FCMWizard web-based tool show that the proposed method provides an opportunity to policy-makers for evaluating outcomes of proposed policies while addressing social resilience and economic mobility. Participatory methods to support successful policy decisions regarding the complex and dynamic interactions of social, ecological, and physical processes involved in flooding must be simple, easy-to-use, and cost-efficient. Accordingly, a stepwise methodological framework based on causal loop diagrams (CLDs) was developed to address the challenge of context-sensitive initialization of key stakeholders in the collaborative flood risk management process. The methodology consists of five main stages: (i) problem definition, (ii) stakeholder analysis and identification of key groups, (iii) interviews with key stakeholders to construct individual CLDs, (iv) merging of individual CLDs to form a holistic qualitative model representing the entire system, and (v) implementation of an order-oriented reduction process to simplify the final merged CLD, thereby increasing understanding of the most important processes and feedbacks. The proposed approach for flood risk management was tested in a coastal area of southern Italy, a region historically affected by flood events. Given its simplicity, the proposed method was seen as a valuable tool to elicit and map mental models, especially when working with stakeholders who did not have prior modeling experience, i.e., farmers, agricultural companies, tourist complexes, and infrastructure authorities. Indeed, all stakeholders in the current study were able to understand the process and proposed different flood risk management policies, such as land-use changes, management of damage insurance payouts, floodplain activities, and improvement of public awareness. The proposed methodology overcame multiple barriers in initializing stakeholder engagement, including the technical focus of most flood management agencies, the additional cost and time requirements for stakeholder involvement, as well as institutional structures that impede collaborative management. Moreover, the results point to socio-economic aspects of flood risk management that have not been considered in previous modeling studies.

Water management is a controversial environmental policy issue, due to the heterogeneity of interests associated with a shared resource and the increasing level of conflict among water uses and users. Nowadays, there is a cumulative interest in enhancing multi-stakeholder decision-making processes, overtaking binding mercantile business, in water management domain. This requires the development of dynamic decision-aiding tools able to integrate the different problem frames held by the decision makers, to clarify the differences, to support the creation of collaborative decision-making processes and to provide shared platforms of interactions. In literature, these issues are faced by concepts such as Ostrom's action arena and Ostanello-Tsoukiàs’ interaction space (IS). The analysis of the interactions structure and of the different problem framing involved are fundamental premises for a successful debate for the management of a common-pool resource. Specifically, the present paper suggests a dynamic evolution of the IS, highlighting its criticalities. It develops an alternative perspective on the problem, using a System Dynamics Model (SDM), exploring how different actions can influence the decision-making processes of various stakeholders involved in the IS. The SDM has been implemented in a multi-stakeholders decision-making situation in order to support water management and groundwater protection in the agricultural systems in the Capitanata area (Apulia region, Southern Italy).

Growing urban populations, changes in rainfall patterns and ageing infrastructure represent significant challenges for urban water management (UWM). There is a critical need for research into how cities should adapt to become resilient to these impacts under uncertain futures. UWM challenges in the Ebbsfleet Garden City (UK) were investigated via a participatory process and potential sustainable solutions were explored using a System Dynamics Model (SDM). Collaborative development of the SDM by the Ebbsfleet Learning and Action Alliance developed stakeholders’ understanding of future UWM options and enabled a structured exploration of interdependencies within the current UWM system. Discussion by stakeholders resulted in a focus on potable water use and the development of the SDM to investigate how residential potable water consumption in the Ebbsfleet Garden City might be reduced through a range of interventions, e.g., socio-environmental and economic policy incentives. The SDM approach supports decision-making at a strategic, system-wide level, and facilitates exploration of the long-term consequences of alternative strategies, particularly those that are difficult to include in quantitative models. While an SDM can be developed by experts alone, building it collaboratively allows the process to benefit from local knowledge, resulting in a collective learning process and increased potential for adoption.

Sustainable and responsive water management policies are essential to provide high-quality, reasonably priced drinking water to consumers at any time, while simultaneously ensuring a profit for the water utility. Such goal can be typically achieved through two different types of policy, namely increasing water supply, or managing water demand; the latter can be performed, among others, through water pricing. Pricing, especially when demand-based, can lead to a behavioural change in customer water use, but it is arduous to introduce for a number of political and social reasons; it is essential to engage with relevant stakeholders to clearly recognize pros and cons of implementing a new water tariff. As a consequence, in this paper, economic and social implications of demand-based tariff structures, and their potential for greater water conservation, are assessed through a participatory approach. The variation of residential water demand and revenue outcomes were simulated through an integrated participatory systems approach by assuming that an inclining block tariff was introduced on the Gold Coast region, Australia. Such connection between price, demand, and revenue is highly complex and the choice of System Dynamics for this modelling exercise is considered ideal as it can explicitly handle the non-linearity, feedbacks and interconnections of such system. The simulation model was developed by collaborating with relevant stakeholders, thus ensuring the logical inclusion of all the relevant inputs and connections. Such model integrates three components, namely revenue forecasting; water billing; and demand feedback sub-model. The results show that: a) the inclining block tariff can effectively lead to behavioural change and water consumption reduction, especially within the high water users group, although the predicted water savings would be lower than when adopting water restrictions; b) customers’ feedback to an increased cost can be used to achieve revenue neutrality; c) based on customer feedback and modelling simulations, the ideal proportion of customers to be charged with the second block tariff is 20%, however this can be recalculated and varied during wet seasons or dry seasons to optimise water availability. The developed model allows water planners to explore a wide range of policy alternatives (e.g. alternative pricing scenarios to influence demand) over medium to long-term periods and to optimise best-practice decision making for urban water conservation and management.

Recent advances in cloud-computing and social-networking are influencing how we communicate professionally, work collaboratively, and approach data-science tasks. Here we show how the groundwater modeling field is well positioned to benefit from these advances. We present a case study detailing a vertically-integrated, collaborative modeling framework jointly developed by participants at the American Samoa Power Authority and at the University of Hawaii Water Resources Research Center. The framework components include direct collection and analysis of climate and streamflow data, development of a water budget model, and initiation of a dynamic groundwater modeling process. The framework is entirely open-source and applies newly available data-science infrastructure using Python-based tools compiled with Jupyter Notebooks and cloud computing services such as GitHub. These resources allow for seamless integration of multiple computational components into a dynamic cloud-based workflow that is immediately accessible to stakeholders, resource managers, or anyone with an internet connection.

Increasing competition for resources in small-scale fsheries (SSFs) can lead to overharvesting and threatens their sustainability. Sustainable management policies require engaging multiple resource users in decision-making processes, capturing diverse interests, and creating a platform for collaborative activities. This paper combines participatory modelling and systems thinking approaches to develop a joint stakeholder understanding of system structure, feedback mechanisms, and system archetypes of a SSF system in the Tam Giang Lagoon, located along the central coast of Vietnam. The model revealed the extent to which the dynamics of this SSF system were governed by nonlinear and cyclic feedback loops between social and ecological components. To manage complexity, the interactions between reinforcing and balancing feedback loops were distilled into four key system archetypes—Limits to growth, Fixes that fail, Success to the successful, and Tragedy of the commons—that provide crucial lenses to identify leverage points for efective management. The fndings suggest that the possibilities to avoid the dominance of undesirable archetypes in this highly contested fshery system remain limited for both local resource users and managers because of cultural and socioeconomic constraints. Reducing intensifed resource exploitation and expanding livelihood alternatives for communities are key towards more sustainable pathways for this common-pool resource system and other similar ones. This case study demonstrates the usefulness of an analytical approach that integrates participatory modelling with systems thinking with the ultimate goal of improving communication and collaboration among multiple stakeholders in complex socio-ecological situations.

In this chapter, we explore integrated modeling (IM) methods and tools supporting adaptive management of estuarine and coastal ecosystems, particularly focusing on participatory system dynamics-based approaches. We describe Mediated Modeling experiences developed in the Guadiana estuary and the Ria Formosa coastal wetland in Portugal and present two integrated models (GUMBO and MIMES) developed to support the valuation of ecosystem services. These cases illustrate a multiscale IM framework underlying a progression from scoping to research and management models. We draw a set of lessons and suggestions for further research on deliberative IM platforms for coastal and estuarine systems.